[clang-tidy] Add check bugprone-misleading-setter-of-reference (#132242)
llvm/llvm-project: clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/misleading-setter-of-reference.rst

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-misleading-setter-of-reference

bugprone-misleading-setter-of-reference
=======================================

> Finds setter-like functions that take a pointer parameter and set a (non-const)

Reviewer: Please place a newline after the first sentence. 
See `clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/bugprone/capturing-this-in-member-variable.rst` for reference.

Reviewer 2: (I think this can be marked as resolved -- am I right?)

reference with the pointed value. The fact that a setter function takes a
pointer might cause the belief that an internal reference (if it would be a
pointer) is changed instead of the pointed-to (or referenced) value.

Only member functions are detected which have a single parameter and contain a
single (maybe overloaded) assignment operator call.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  class Widget {
    int& ref_;  // non-const reference member
  public:

>     // non-copyable
>     Widget(const Widget&) = delete;
>     // non-movable
>     Widget(Widget&&) = delete;
>  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I understand that a class with a reference member is problematic if it doesn't disable the copy/move constructors, but there is no reason to explicitly spell out these deleted methods in this example, because they don't have a role in the problem that's reported by this checker.

If you want, you could add `// ...` at the end of the class definition to show that there are other methods (including these deleted ones) -- but I don't think that this is necessary.

.. title:: clang-tidy - bugprone-misleading-setter-of-reference

bugprone-misleading-setter-of-reference
=======================================

Finds setter-like member functions that take a pointer parameter and set a
(non-const) reference member of the same class with the pointed value.

> The checker detects public member functions that have a single parameter (which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The check detects public member functions that have a single parameter (which
```

Clang-Tidy uses `check`.

> The checker detects public member functions that have a single parameter (which
> is a pointer) and contain a single (maybe overloaded) assignment operator call.
> The assignment should set a member variable with the dereference of the
> parameter pointer. The member variable can have any visibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The checker detects public member functions that take a single pointer
parameter, and contain a single expression statement that dereferences the
parameter and assigns the result to a data member with a reference type.
```
This paragraph was a bit unclear, because it tries to describe a very complex situation. I tried to reword it (with some help from Endre) to make it easier to understand. 

In my suggestion I don't explicitly mention "(maybe overloaded)" and "any visibility" because those are the defaults from the point of view from the user: in theory overloaded assignment operators are equivalent to built-in ones and if we don't speak about constraints on the visibility of a data member, then we imply that it can have any visibility.

The fact that a setter function takes a pointer might cause the belief that an
internal reference (if it would be a pointer) is changed instead of the
pointed-to (or referenced) value.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  class MyClass {
    int &InternalRef;  // non-const reference member
  public:
    MyClass(int &Value) : InternalRef(Value) {}

    // Warning: This setter could lead to unintended behaviour.
    void setRef(int *Value) {
      InternalRef = *Value;  // This assigns to the referenced value, not changing what ref_ references.
    }
  };

  int main() {
    int Value1 = 42;
    int Value2 = 100;
    MyClass X(Value1);
    
    // This might look like it changes what InternalRef references to,
    // but it actually modifies Value1 to be 100.
    X.setRef(&Value2);
  }

Possible fixes:

>   - Change the parameter type of the "set" function to non-pointer or const reference
>     type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Change the parameter type of the "set" function to a non-pointer type (for
    example, a const reference).
```
"non-pointer or const reference type" was strange, because const references are a subset of non-pointer types.

Finds setter-like member functions that take a pointer parameter and set a
(non-const) reference member of the same class with the pointed value.

The checker detects public member functions that have a single parameter (which
is a pointer) and contain a single (maybe overloaded) assignment operator call.
The assignment should set a member variable with the dereference of the
parameter pointer. The member variable can have any visibility.

The fact that a setter function takes a pointer might cause the belief that an
internal reference (if it would be a pointer) is changed instead of the
pointed-to (or referenced) value.

Example:

.. code-block:: c++

  class MyClass {
    int &InternalRef;  // non-const reference member
  public:
    MyClass(int &Value) : InternalRef(Value) {}

    // Warning: This setter could lead to unintended behaviour.
    void setRef(int *Value) {

>       InternalRef = *Value;  // This assigns to the referenced value, not changing what ref_ references.

Reviewer 2: The comment still uses the old name `ref_`, please update it.
